---
layout: post-writing
title:  "Own It"
subtitle: "“Whatever you’re doing, you made a choice to do it, and whether you want to
or not, you’ve gotta own it.”"
excerpt: "I was in the
honeymoon phase of “creative work,” and this photographer was prattling on
about this, that, and the other…"
date:   2015-01-31 21:07:32
categories: writing
---
It was hot. And really muggy. In August, one becomes painfully aware that most
of central Ohio used to be a swamp.

I lost my train of thought, but I wanted to keep listening. I was in the
honeymoon phase of “creative work,” and this photographer was prattling on
about this, that, and the other. I can’t remember his name, or most of what he
said, except for one tidbit that’s stuck with me years later.

“Whatever you’re doing, you made a choice to do it, and whether you want to
or not, you’ve gotta own it.”

I’m paraphrasing, but this is the idea that I’ve returned to many times in the
course of my design practice.

Some days, the clouds part and a light shines down with the best opportunity.
You share a passion with your client, they’ve got a hefty budget, they know
what they need, and the rapport is instant.

Most days, especially as an up-and-comer, this is not the case. We’ve all got
bills to pay, and that third-string marketing agency needs some newspaper
inserts that, “you know, just really pop.” Or you’ve got an opportunity to do
some work that you really care about, but the client doesn’t have money, and
you’ve gotta accept that taking on their project means no paycheck for a few
weeks.

Either of these situations can make any designer, writer, photographer end up
wanting to pull their hair out. I’m either not getting paid, or I’m not moving
my career in the direction I want it to go.

### You Made A Choice

You’d be hard pressed to find anyone in a creative profession that was
“forced” into their industry. No one with their back against the wall has ever
thought, “Well, I guess graphic design would be a good way to make some quick
cash.” The vast majority of us are very lucky, and a lot of stars probably had
to align for us to get to where we are.

That being said, this is a choice. And there’s no shame in changing your mind,
or even just taking a hiatus to rethink your goals.

I try to remember that when I’m approached with a shit project, taking it on
is a choice. Even if the alternative seems a bit risky. I cover my ass with
kill clauses in every project (a mutually beneficial situation), but keeping
in mind that I am making a choice has helped me avoid some bad situations.
(Side note: I’ve always found manual labor a good and well-paying way to take
a break from the everyday stress of creative work)

### Attitude Trumps Ego

Why? Because no one else can do it for you. Whether you’re a solo freelancer
or part of a team, other people can push you, they can try to convince you
that the work matters. But it’s gonna come down to you.

This isn’t about ego, it’s about attitude. Owning it doesn’t mean injecting
your personal style into every project. It means due diligence and hard work
for their own sake. It means owning up to the fact that your job is not only
to get the lighting right, pick a good color palette, or write up the best
tagline. Your job is advocating to your client.

#### _There are no bad creative briefs, only bad designers._

I admit, I’m guilty of blaming the brief. Sometimes the client just doesn’t
get it. I know that they want a handful of one-off fliers, but that logo
really looks like shit. Come to think of it, their whole brand strategy is a
bit off. Michael Bierut even coined a term for this: [Problem Definition
Escalation](http://designobserver.com/feature/youre-so-intelligent/5917/).
It’s easy to go down the rabbit hole of “what’s wrong with this picture,”
especially when the client invites your opinion.

Honestly, I’ve found that better work comes out of sticking to the brief.
We’re creative, dammit! If the brief is restrictive, that’s great. Maybe the
product isn’t the best or the cheapest, but that just makes the creative
challenge that much more engaging.

I used to work as in-house art director at an apparel company, and several
weeks after bringing on a new photographer, we ran into an issue. This
photographer felt that one of the new products we were introducing was simply
too low quality to make it look appealing to customers. After a week of trying
to shoot it, we were again on the hunt for a new photographer.

The thought occurred to me a few days later, that challenging briefs like this
are worth their weight in frustration. Obviously, it’s difficult to hear that
your hard work isn’t quite up to snuff. What I try to keep in mind is, a
project can feel like it’s a lost cause, but the work is rewarding in the
lessons it teaches you. Even if you’re working for an industry you couldn’t
care less about.

### A Side Note on Side Projects

Side projects are great. I used to shut down in the evenings and weekends when
I was in the midst of unlikeable paid work. That was all well and good, but I
think I’ve found something better.

Last year I spent a lot more time than I would have liked to shooting and
editing product photography. It was very technical, very precise, and very
boring. Eight hours a day, five days a week, for three months. In the
evenings, I drew letters.

They weren’t even good, and they didn’t spin off into sellable products or
lead to work that I was interested in. But the results didn’t matter. The
point is that, even when I was pressed by my employer to do work that I wasn’t
wild about, I still had something to put creative energy toward that mattered
to me for its own sake.

### Owning It

I’m not sure if I’ve understood exactly what that photographer was talking
about on that hot, sweaty day five years ago. For all I know, he was just
making small talk, inflating his ego in front of some creative neophytes.

But that’s beside the point. This idea has stuck with me, and I keep coming
back to it. I think there’s something to be gained from the concept of “owning
it,” and I hope that I’ve given you something to keep in your pocket when the
going gets tough.