---
layout: post-writing
title:  "Why Boulder Digital Works?"
subtitle: "Part 1"
excerpt: "Just before Thanksgiving 2014, I made the decision to leave a comfortable and
enjoyable job in my hometown, and go back to school…"
date:   2015-01-14 21:07:32
categories: writing
---

## Part 1

Just before Thanksgiving 2014, I made the decision to leave a comfortable and
enjoyable job in my hometown, and go back to school. The program I chose to
attend, Boulder Digital Works (or BDW for short) is anything but typical.
Classes started this week, and as a new student, the question of motivation
has come up multiple times.

I’ve approached this question from multiple angles, and I’d like to get it
down on paper (or rather on screen), if for nothing else than for the sake of
revisiting at the end of the program, to see how BDW changes my approach to
design, my thought process, and my goals.

### Who I am

My design path started in 2008, when I embarked on a Bachelor’s of Science
track in Landscape Architecture at the Ohio State University. After my first
year, I became interested in graphic design, and elected to pursue a minor in
the university’s design department.

I quickly found that, when I wanted to procrastinate on a project for my
major, I would often work on visual projects. Jessica Hische would call this
“procrastiworking” and I’m in full agreement with her on the idea that this is
the type of work one should do for a living. This belief led me to pursue a
graphic design career after graduating in 2012.

I decided to go freelance, despite the fact that I really had no idea what I
was doing, and I soon got involved with a makerspace in Columbus called the
Columbus Idea Foundry. For the next year and a half, I spent my days on client
work and my nights on the Idea Foundry brand.

Late in 2013, I was approached by Daniel Fox, the founder of online t-shirt
retailer Skreened, with an opportunity that would be a wet dream for most
graphic designers; to take free reign over the established brand, and execute
it however I saw fit.

Over the following year, I designed over 100 promotional campaigns, a handful
of in-house typefaces, and learned a great deal about commercial branding. As
the year drew on, however, I began to feel that it wasn’t enough. I wasn’t
satisfied with, as Frank Chimero puts it, design as decoration. The pressure
and pace of the company made it difficult, not only for myself but for the
entire creative team, to really dig in to design challenges.

This difficulty was compounded by the realization that, maybe, art direction
wasn’t my strong suit. I made the leap from graphic designer to art director
early on in my career, and I never stopped to think about which type of work
best suits me. I think I prefer the design side and actually producing things,
but maybe I just need some lessons in how to direct other creatives.

So, I started looking around.

Having previously applied and been accepted to a handful of great MFA Design
programs, I had some vague ideas about what I was looking for. I wanted to
find a program that would not put me into debt, that would not restrict my
flexibility, and most importantly, a program that would not take me fully
outside of the industry.

### Enter BDW

My interest was piqued when I stumbled upon an article entitled [The Anatomy
of an Agency Talent Crisis](http://digiday.com/agencies/nobody-wants-work-
agencies/), which briefly mentioned BDW. That was enough to get me interested,
and serendipitously, I was flying out to Denver for Thanksgiving, so I set up
a studio visit.

The full rundown of the BDW approach can be found on the [studio’s
website](http://bdw.colorado.edu/). I could rattle off a list a mile long of
all the things that appeal to me about BDW, but I’ll focus on just a few.

>BDW is the real world

Again, I didn’t want to step out of the industry entirely. BDW students are
guided by industry leaders, not full-time academics. I’ve been in the real
word for several years. Why would I want to step out of it?

>Projects that bridge physical and digital media

This has been a point of interest of mine since reading Frank Chimero’s
article [Designing in the Borderlands](http://frankchimero.com/talks
/designing-in-the-borderlands/transcript/). When it comes to physical vs.
digital, I don’t want to pick sides. I don’t think I, or anyone for that
matter, has to. There are unique challenges and opportunities in every medium,
and I’d like to explore those.

>There is no typical BDW student

Students at BDW come from a range of backgrounds, from finance to performance
art. I think something really awful happens when designers put ourselves in an
exclusive category and close ourselves off to what other creatives are doing.
This inter-mixing of disciplines also presents opportunities for every student
to learn by teaching. I’ve already benefited from questions that other
students have asked me about my approach, which has forced me to re-think how
I’m comfortable doing things and shed light on new approaches.

These aspects combined with the relatively fast approach (we’ll be done in
about 7 months) and the low cost of the program made my decision an easy one.
At the end of the day, I couldn’t see any reason not to attend BDW.

Perhaps the question still remains, if I know what I want to learn, and I was
in the real world, why would I go back to school at all? The truth of the
matter is, industry moves fast and the pressure to avoid failure can stifle
creativity. There are, of course, plenty of studio’s, agency’s, and company’s
that exemplify the opposite approach, one that embraces failure as integral to
the creative process. But that wasn’t the case where I was. BDW presents me
with an opportunity to go deep, fail often, and learn a lot in a short amount
of time. Ultimately, that opportunity is why I made the switch.

### What I hope to gain

So, what’s my goal? I don’t have one. I believe that, just as the best
products are born out of an immersive process, the best experiences don’t have
a set end point. I’m not here for the grade, I’m here for the experience. I’m
not here to master new softwares and programming languages, I’m here to think
like a better designer than I was yesterday, and to create things that matter
to real people.

I’ll revisit this topic in several months, at the end of the BDW program, with
a look back on what I learned and how the program has influenced me. Stay
tuned.

***

_Learn more about the [BDW program](http://bdw.colorado.edu/)._